A snapshot about HANU
Hanoi University or HANU (formerly Hanoi University of Foreign Studies) is a public higher education institution (HEI) established in 1959. HANU is now a prestigious multi-disciplinary HEI offering multiple study opportunities to over 15,000 students, including just under 1,000 international students from over 30 countries and territories. HANU is proud to be among the first HEIs in Vietnam to exercise full institutional autonomy, internationalization, and deliver English medium instruction programs.
VISION: Hanoi University is strategically positioned as a multidisciplinary higher education institution of applied sciences for teaching, research and professional & civic engagement by 2045. It aspires to stand among the top universities in Vietnam and become a renowned HEI in Asia.
MISSION: HANU pledges its commitment to prepare graduates with high-level competence in foreign language, research and technology transfer in an ever-increasing range of global integration, making distinctive contribution to the sustainable national development and social progress.
CORE VALUES: HANU recognises the critical importance of the values of dynamism, creativity, responsibility, critical thinking, and resilience. HANU commits to cultivating a study and work environment that forms and nurtures those values.
Dynamism: Dynamism is characterised by being proactive, positive, action-oriented, and risk-taking. It is the dynamic that leads to positive behaviours, passions, and utmost efforts to bring goals to fruition. Being dynamic allows individuals to identify opportunities in a range of circumstances.
Responsibility: Assuming responsibility for oneself, family, the community in which they live, natural environment, work duties, words and actions; without any if’s, but’s, blaming others; constant self-respect and respect for others’ endeavours.
Critical thinking: Having the ability of developing logical reasoning; recognising different points of view and assumptions; understanding multiple perspectives; making objective and non-egotistical evaluations of information; identifying and using reliable information in complex and rapidly evolving life environments.
Creativity: Having the ability to challenge one’s constraints, research, analyse, test, adapt, and adopt a proactive stance in the application of knowledge and skills in new ways to achieve values and outcomes.
Resilience: Having the ability to work with difference and adapt to change.
EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY: HANU’s educational philosophy is Learn to transform. HANU pledges to prepare its graduates to achieve excellence in professional knowledge and in-demand skills for success in the modern world; to apply creativity and innovation in the everyday context to foster personal growth and bring about a positive influence on others.
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES: HANU is dedicated to educating learners to become responsible citizens with reinforced awareness of the Vietnamese values and national ethos upon global integration, robust professional competence, high-level foreign language proficiency and IT literacy so as to perform professional and managerial tasks to serve social needs; ability and desire to pursue life-long learning to upgrade their knowledge and skills based on societal needs for global integration and scientific and technological revolution. HANU graduates perform effectively organizational flexibility and adaptability to change at work and life environments; conduct effective research and application of science and technology, contributing to fostering the national prosperity.
SLOGAN: HANU develops and disseminates its message for the operationalisation of development via the motto for action: HANU brings you to the world. The slogan also prescribes the University’s guiding principle for sustainable development.
