PART II
TERRITORIAL SEA AND CONTIGUOUS ZONE
SECTION 1.
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 2
Legal status of the territorial sea, of the air space 
over the territorial sea and of its bed and subsoil
1.
The sovereignty of a coastal State extends, beyond its land territory
and internal waters and, in the case of an archipelagic State, its archipelagic
waters, to an adjacent belt of sea, described as the territorial sea.
2.
This sovereignty extends to the air space over the territorial sea as
well as to its bed and subsoil.
3.
The sovereignty over the territorial sea is exercised subject to this
Convention and to other rules of international law.
SECTION 2.
 LIMITS OF THE TERRITORIAL SEA
Article 3
Breadth of the territorial sea
Every State has the right to establish the breadth of its territorial sea up
to a limit not exceeding 12 nautical miles, measured from baselines
determined in accordance with this Convention.
Article 4
Outer limit of the territorial sea
The outer limit of the territorial sea is the line every point of which is at
a distance from the nearest point of the baseline equal to the breadth of the
territorial sea.
Article 5
Normal baseline
Except where otherwise provided in this Convention, the normal baseline
for measuring the breadth of the territorial sea is the low-water line along the
coast as marked on large-scale charts officially recognized by the coastal
State.
Article 6
Reefs
In the case of islands situated on atolls or of islands having fringing
reefs, the baseline for measuring the breadth of the territorial sea is the
seaward low-water line of the reef, as shown by the appropriate symbol on
charts officially recognized by the coastal State.28
Article 7
Straight baselines
1.
In localities where the coastline is deeply indented and cut into, or
if there is a fringe of islands along the coast in its immediate vicinity, the
method of straight baselines joining appropriate points may be employed in
drawing the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.
2.
Where because of the presence of a delta and other natural
conditions the coastline is highly unstable, the appropriate points may be
selected along the furthest seaward extent of the low-water line and,
notwithstanding subsequent regression of the low-water line, the straight
baselines shall remain effective until changed by the coastal State in
accordance with this Convention.
3.
The drawing of straight baselines must not depart to any appreciable
extent from the general direction of the coast, and the sea areas lying within
the lines must be sufficiently closely linked to the land domain to be subject
to the regime of internal waters.
4.
Straight baselines shall not be drawn to and from low-tide elevations,
unless lighthouses or similar installations which are permanently above sea
level have been built on them or except in instances where the drawing of
baselines to and from such elevations has received general international
recognition.
5.
Where the method of straight baselines is applicable under
paragraph 1, account may be taken, in determining particular baselines, of
economic interests peculiar to the region concerned, the reality and the
importance of which are clearly evidenced by long usage.
6.
The system of straight baselines may not be applied by a State in
such a manner as to cut off the territorial sea of another State from the high
seas or an exclusive economic zone.
Article 8
Internal waters
1.
Except as provided in Part IV, waters on the landward side of the
baseline of the territorial sea form part of the internal waters of the State.
2.
Where the establishment of a straight baseline in accordance with the
method set forth in article 7 has the effect of enclosing as internal waters
areas which had not previously been considered as such, a right of innocent
passage as provided in this Convention shall exist in those waters.
Article 9
Mouths of rivers
If a river flows directly into the sea, the baseline shall be a straight line
across the mouth of the river between points on the low-water line of its
banks.
Article 10
Bays
1.
This article relates only to bays the coasts of which belong to a
single State.29
2.
For the purposes of this Convention, a bay is a well-marked
indentation whose penetration is in such proportion to the width of its mouth
as to contain land-locked waters and constitute more than a mere curvature
of the coast.
 An indentation shall not, however, be regarded as a bay unless
its area is as large as, or larger than, that of the semi-circle whose diameter is
a line drawn across the mouth of that indentation.
3.
For the purpose of measurement, the area of an indentation is that
lying between the low-water mark around the shore of the indentation and a
line joining the low-water mark of its natural entrance points.
 Where,
because of the presence of islands, an indentation has more than one mouth,
the semi-circle shall be drawn on a line as long as the sum total of the lengths
of the lines across the different mouths.
 Islands within an indentation shall
be included as if they were part of the water area of the indentation.
4.
If the distance between the low-water marks of the natural entrance
points of a bay does not exceed 24 nautical miles, a closing line may be
drawn between these two low-water marks, and the waters enclosed thereby
shall be considered as internal waters.
5.
Where the distance between the low-water marks of the natural
entrance points of a bay exceeds 24 nautical miles, a straight baseline of
24 nautical miles shall be drawn within the bay in such a manner as to enclose
the maximum area of water that is possible with a line of that length.
6.
The foregoing provisions do not apply to so-called "historic" bays,
or in any case where the system of straight baselines provided for in article 7
is applied.
Article 11
Ports
For the purpose of delimiting the territorial sea, the outermost permanent
harbour works which form an integral part of the har bour system are regarded
as forming part of the coast.
 Off-shore installations and artificial islands shall
not be considered as permanent harbour works.
Article 12
Roadsteads
Roadsteads which are normally used for the loading, unloading and
anchoring of ships, and which would otherwise be situated wholly or partly
outside the outer limit of the territorial sea, are included in the territorial sea.
Article 13
Low-tide elevations
1.
A low-tide elevation is a naturally formed area of land which is
surrounded by and above water at low tide but submerged at high tide.
 Where
a low-tide elevation is situated wholly or partly at a distance not exceeding
the breadth of the territorial sea from the mainland or an island, the low-water
line on that elevation may be used as the baseline for measuring the breadth
of the territorial sea.
2.
Where a low-tide elevation is wholly situated at a distance exceeding
the breadth of the territorial sea from the mainland or an island, it has no
territorial sea of its own.30
Article 14
Combination of methods for determining baselines
The coastal State may determine baselines in turn by any of the methods
provided for in the foregoing articles to suit different conditions.
Article 15
Delimitation of the territorial sea between States
with opposite or adjacent coasts
Where the coasts of two States are opposite or adj acent to each other,
neither of the two States is entitled, failing agreement between them to the
contrary, to extend its territorial sea beyond the median line every point of
which is equidistant from the nearest points on the baselines from which the
breadth of the territorial seas of each of the two States is measured.
 The
above provision does not apply, however, where it is necessary by reason of
historic title or other special circumstances to delimit the territorial seas of the
two States in a way which is at variance therewith.
Article 16
Charts and lists of geographical coordinates
1.
The baselines for measuring the breadth of the territorial sea
determined in accordance with articles 7, 9 and 10, or the limits derived
therefrom, and the lines of delimitation drawn in accordance with articles 12
and 15 shall be shown on charts of a scale or scales adequate for ascertaining
their position.
 Alternatively, a list of geographical coordinates of points,
specifying the geodetic datum, may be substituted.
2.
The coastal State shall give due publicity to such charts or lists of
geographical coordinates and shall deposit a copy of each such chart or list
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
SECTION 3.
 INNOCENT PASSAGE IN THE TERRITORIAL SEA
SUBSECTION A.
 RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL SHIPS
Article 17
Right of innocent passage
Subject to this Convention, ships of all States, whether coastal or
land-locked, enjoy the right of innocent passage through the territorial sea.
Article 18
Meaning of passage
1.
Passage means navigation through the territorial sea for the purpose
of:
(a) traversing that sea without entering internal waters or calling at
a roadstead or port facility outside internal waters; or
(b) proceeding to or from internal waters or a call at such roadstead
or port facility.
2.
Passage shall be continuous and expeditious.
 However, passage
includes stopping and anchoring, but only in so far as the same are incidental31
to ordinary navigation or are rendered necessary by force majeure  or distress
or for the purpose of rendering assistance to persons, ships or aircraft in
danger or distress.
Article 19
Meaning of innocent passage
1.
Passage is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good
order or security of the coastal State.
 Such passage shall take place in
conformity with this Convention and with other rules of international law.
2.
Passage of a foreign ship shall be considered to be prejudicial to the
peace, good order or security of the coastal State if in the territorial sea it
engages in any of the following activities:
(a) any threat or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial
integrity or political independence of the coastal State, or in any
other manner in violation of the principles of international law
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations;
(b) any exercise or practice with weapons of any kind;
(c) any act aimed at collecting information to the prejudice of the
defence or security of the coastal State;
(d) any act of propaganda aimed at affecting the defence or security
of the coastal State;
(e) the launching, landing or taking on board of any aircraft;
(f) the launching, landing or taking on board of any military
device;
(g) the loading or unloading of any commodity, currency or person
contrary to the customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and
regulations of the coastal State;
(h) any act of wilful and serious pollution contrary to this
Convention;
(i) any fishing activities;
(j) the carrying out of research or survey activities;
(k) any act aimed at interfering with any systems of communication
or any other facilities or installations of the coastal State;
(l) any other activity not having a direct bearing on passage.
Article 20
Submarines and other underwater vehicles
In the territorial sea, submarines and other underwater vehicles are
required to navigate on the surface and to show their flag.
Article 21
Laws and regulations of the coastal State relating to innocent passage
1.
The coastal State may adopt laws and regulations, in conformity with
the provisions of this Convention and other rules of international law, relating
to innocent passage through the territorial sea, in respect of all or any of the
following:
(a) the safety of navigation and the regulation of maritime traffic;
(b) the protection of navigational aids and facilities and other
facilities or installations;
(c) the protection of cables and pipelines;32
(d) the conservation of the living resources of the sea;
(e) the prevention of infringement of the fisheries laws and
regulations of the coastal State;
(f) the preservation of the environment of the coastal State and the
prevention, reduction and control of pollution thereof;
(g) marine scientific research and hydrographic surveys;
(h) the prevention of infringement of the customs, fiscal,
immigration or sanitary laws and regulations of the coastal
State.
2.
Such laws and regulations shall not apply to the design, construction,
manning or equipment of foreign ships unless they are giving effect to
generally accepted international rules or standards.
3.
The coastal State shall give due publicity to all such laws and
regulations.
4.
Foreign ships exercising the right of innocent passage through the
territorial sea shall comply with all such laws and regulations and all
generally accepted international regulations relating to the prevention of
collisions at sea.
Article 22
Sea lanes and traffic separation schemes in the territorial sea
1.
The coastal State may, where necessary having regard to the safety
of navigation, require foreign ships exercising the right of innocent passage
through its territorial sea to use such sea lanes and traffic separation schemes
as it may designate or prescribe for the regulation of the passage of ships.
2.
In particular, tankers, nuclear-powered ships and ships carrying
nuclear or other inherently dangerous or noxious substances or materials may
be required to confine their passage to such sea lanes.
3.
In the designation of sea lanes and the prescription of traffic
separation schemes under this article, the coastal State shall take into account:
(a) the recommendations of the competent international
organization;
(b) any channels customarily used for international navigation;
(c) the special characteristics of particular ships and channels; and
(d) the density of traffic.
4.
The coastal State shall clearly indicate such sea lanes and traffic
separation schemes on charts to which due publicity shall be given.
Article 23
Foreign nuclear-powered ships and ships carrying nuclear
or other inherently dangerous or noxious substances
Foreign nuclear-powered ships and ships carrying nuclear or other
inherently dangerous or noxious substances shall, when exercising the right
of innocent passage through the territorial sea, carry documents and observe
special precautionary measures established for such ships by international
agreements.33
Article 24
Duties of the coastal State
1.
The coastal State shall not hamper the innocent passage of foreign
ships through the territorial sea except in accordance with this Convention.
In particular, in the application of this Convention or of any laws or
regulations adopted in conformity with this Convention, the coastal State
shall not:
(a) impose requirements on foreign ships which have the practical
effect of denying or impairing the right of innocent passage; or
(b) discriminate in form or in fact against the ships of any State or
against ships carrying cargoes to, from or on behalf of any
State.
2.
The coastal State shall give appropriate publicity to any danger to
navigation, of which it has knowledge, within its territorial sea.
Article 25
Rights of protection of the coastal State
1.
The coastal State may take the necessary steps in its territorial sea to
prevent passage which is not innocent.
2.
In the case of ships proceeding to internal waters or a call at a port
facility outside internal waters, the coastal State also has the right to take the
necessary steps to prevent any breach of the conditions to which admission
of those ships to internal waters or such a call is subject.
3.
The coastal State may, without discrimination in form or in fact
among foreign ships, suspend temporarily in specified areas of its territorial
sea the innocent passage of foreign ships if such suspension is essential for
the protection of its security, including weapons exercises.
 Such suspension
shall take effect only after having been duly published.
Article 26
Charges which may be levied upon foreign ships
1.
No charge may be levied upon foreign ships by reason only of their
passage through the territorial sea.
2.
Charges may be levied upon a foreign ship passing through the
territorial sea as payment only for specific services rendered to the ship.
These charges shall be levied without discrimination.
SUBSECTION B.
 RULES APPLICABLE TO
MERCHANT SHIPS AND GOVERNMENT SHIPS 
OPERATED FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES
Article 27
Criminal jurisdiction on board a foreign ship
1.
The criminal jurisdiction of the coastal State should not be exercised
on board a foreign ship passing through the territorial sea to arrest any person
or to conduct any investigation in connection with any crime committed on
board the ship during its passage, save only in the following cases:
(a) if the consequences of the crime extend to the coastal State;34
(b) if the crime is of a kind to disturb the peace of the country or
the good order of the territorial sea;
(c) if the assistance of the local authorities has been requested by
the master of the ship or by a diplomatic agent or consular
officer of the flag State; or
(d) if such measures are necessary for the suppression of illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances.
2.
The above provisions do not affect the right of the coastal State to
take any steps authorized by its laws for the purpose of an arrest or
investigation on board a foreign ship passing through the territorial sea after
leaving internal waters.
3.
In the cases provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2, the coastal State
shall, if the master so requests, notify a diplomatic agent or consular officer
of the flag State before taking any steps, and shall facilitate contact between
such agent or officer and the ship's crew.
 In cases of emergency this
notification may be communicated while the measures are being taken.
4.
In considering whether or in what manner an arrest should be made,
the local authorities shall have due regard to the interests of navigation.
5.
Except as provided in Part XII or with respect to violations of laws
and regulations adopted in accordance with Part V, the coastal State may not
take any steps on board a foreign ship passing through the territorial sea to
arrest any person or to conduct any investigation in connection with any crime
committed before the ship entered the territorial sea, if the ship, proceeding
from a foreign port, is only passing through the territorial sea without entering
internal waters.
Article 28
Civil jurisdiction in relation to foreign ships
1.
The coastal State should not stop or divert a foreign ship passing
through the territorial sea for the purpose of exercising civil jurisdiction in
relation to a person on board the ship.
2.
The coastal State may not levy execution against or arrest the ship
for the purpose of any civil proceedings, save only in respect of obligations
or liabilities assumed or incurred by the ship itself in the course or for the
purpose of its voyage through the waters of the coastal State.
3.
Paragraph 2 is without prejudice to the right of the coastal State, in
accordance with its laws, to levy execution against or to arrest, for the
purpose of any civil proceedings, a foreign ship lying in the territorial sea, or
passing through the territorial sea after leaving internal waters.
SUBSECTION C.
 RULES APPLICABLE TO
WARSHIPS AND OTHER GOVERNMENT SHIPS 
OPERATED FOR NON-COMMERCIAL PURPOSES
Article 29
Definition of warships
For the purposes of this Convention, "warship" means a ship belonging
to the armed forces of a State bearing the external marks distinguishing such
ships of its nationality, under the command of an officer duly commissioned
by the government of the State and whose name appears in the appropriate35
service list or its equivalent, and manned by a crew which is under regular
armed forces discipline.
Article 30
Non-compliance by warships with the laws and regulations
of the coastal State
If any warship does not comply with the laws and regulations of the
coastal State concerning passage through the territorial sea and disregards any
request for compliance therewith which is made to it, the coastal State may
require it to leave the territorial sea immediately.
Article 31
Responsibility of the flag State for damage caused by a warship
or other government ship operated for non-commercial purposes
The flag State shall bear international responsibility for any loss or
damage to the coastal State resulting from the non-compliance by a warship
or other government ship operated for non-commercial purposes with the
laws and regulations of the coastal State concerning passage through the
territorial sea or with the provisions of this Convention or other rules of
international law.
Article 32
Immunities of warships and other government ships
operated for non-commercial purposes
With such exceptions as are contained in subsection A and in articles 30
and 31, nothing in this Convention affects the immunities of warships and
other government ships operated for non-commercial purposes.
SECTION 4.
 CONTIGUOUS ZONE
Article 33
Contiguous zone
1.
In a zone contiguous to its territorial sea, described as the contiguous
zone, the coastal State may exercise the control necessary to:
(a) prevent infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or
sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or territorial
sea;
(b) punish infringement of the above laws and regulations
committed within its territory or territorial sea.
2.
The contiguous zone may not extend beyond 24 nautical miles from
the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.36