PART III
STRAITS USED FOR INTERNATIONAL
NAVIGATION
SECTION 1.
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 34
Legal status of waters forming straits used for international navigation
1.
The regime of passage through straits used for international
navigation established in this Part shall not in other respects affect the legal
status of the waters forming such straits or the exercise by the States
bordering the straits of their sovereignty or jurisdiction over such waters and
their air space, bed and subsoil.
2.
The sovereignty or jurisdiction of the States bordering the straits is
exercised subject to this Part and to other rules of international law.
Article 35
Scope of this Part
Nothing in this Part affects:
(a) any areas of internal waters within a strait, except where the
establishment of a straight baseline in accordance with the method
set forth in article 7 has the effect of enclosing as internal waters
areas which had not previously been considered as such;
(b) the legal status of the waters beyond the territorial seas of States
bordering straits as exclusive economic zones or high seas; or
(c) the legal regime in straits in which passage is regulated in whole or
in part by long-standing international conventions in force
specifically relating to such straits.
Article 36
High seas routes or routes through exclusive economic zones 
through straits used for international navigation
This Part does not apply to a strait used for international navigation if
there exists through the strait a route through the high seas or through an
exclusive economic zone of similar convenience with respect to navigational
and hydrographical characteristics; in such routes, the other relevant Parts of
this Convention, including the provisions regarding the freedoms of
navigation and overflight, apply.
SECTION 2.
 TRANSIT PASSAGE
Article 37
Scope of this section
This section applies to straits which are used for international navigation
between one part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone and another
part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone.37
Article 38
Right of transit passage
1.
In straits referred to in article 37, all ships and aircraft enjoy the right
of transit passage, which shall not be impeded; except that, if the strait is
formed by an island of a State bordering the strait and its mainland, transit
passage shall not apply if there exists seaward of the island a route through
the high seas or through an exclusive economic zone of similar convenience
with respect to navigational and hydrographical characteristics.
2.
Transit passage means the exercise in accordance with this Part of
the freedom of navigation and overflight solely for the purpose of continuous
and expeditious transit of the strait between one part of the high seas or an
exclusive economic zone and another part of the high seas or an exclusive
economic zone.
 However, the requirement of continuous and expeditious
transit does not preclude passage through the strait for the purpose of
entering, leaving or returning from a State bordering the strait, subject to the
conditions of entry to that State.
3.
Any activity which is not an exercise of the right of transit passage
through a strait remains subject to the other applicable provisions of this
Convention.
Article 39
Duties of ships and aircraft during transit passage
1.
Ships and aircraft, while exercising the right of transit passage, shall:
(a) proceed without delay through or over the strait;
(b) refrain from any threat or use of force against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity or political independence of States bordering
the strait, or in any other manner in violation of the principles
of international law embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations;
(c) refrain from any activities other than those incident to their
normal modes of continuous and expeditious transit unless
rendered necessary by force majeure  or by distress;
(d) comply with other relevant provisions of this Part.
2.
Ships in transit passage shall:
(a) comply with generally accepted international regulations,
procedures and practices for safety at sea, including the
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea;
(b) comply with generally accepted international regulations,
procedures and practices for the prevention, reduction and
control of pollution from ships.
3.
Aircraft in transit passage shall:
(a) observe the Rules of the Air established by the International
Civil Aviation Organization as they apply to civil aircraft; state
aircraft will normally comply with such safety measures and
will at all times operate with due regard for the safety of
navigation;
(b) at all times monitor the radio frequency assigned by the
competent internationally designated air traffic control authority
or the appropriate international distress radio frequency.38
Article 40
Research and survey activities
During transit passage, foreign ships, including marine scientific research
and hydrographic survey ships, may not carry out any research or survey
activities without the prior authorization of the States bordering straits.
Article 41
Sea lanes and traffic separation schemes in straits
used for international navigation
1.
In conformity with this Part, States bordering straits may designate
sea lanes and prescribe traffic separation schemes for navigation in straits
where necessary to promote the safe passage of ships.
2.
Such States may, when circumstances require, and after giving due
publicity thereto, substitute other sea lanes or traffic separation schemes for
any sea lanes or traffic separation schemes previously designated or
prescribed by them.
3.
Such sea lanes and traffic separation schemes shall conform to
generally accepted international regulations.
4.
Before designating or substituting sea lanes or prescribing or
substituting traffic separation schemes, States bordering straits shall refer
proposals to the competent international organization with a view to their
adoption.
 The organization may a dopt only such sea lanes and traffic
separation schemes as may be agreed with the States bordering the straits,
after which the States may designate, prescribe or substitute them.
5.
In respect of a strait where sea lanes or traffic separation schemes
through the waters of two or more States bordering the strait are being
proposed, the States concerned shall cooperate in formulating proposals in
consultation with the competent international organization.
6.
States bordering straits shall clearly indicate all sea lanes and traffic
separation schemes designated or prescribed by them on charts to which due
publicity shall be given.
7.
Ships in transit passage shall respect applicable sea lanes and traffic
separation schemes established in accordance with this article.
Article 42
Laws and regulations of States bordering straits
relating to transit passage
1.
Subject to the provisions of this section, States bordering straits may
adopt laws and regulations relating to transit passage through straits, in
respect of all or any of the following:
(a) the safety of navigation and the regulation of maritime traffic,
as provided in article 41;
(b) the prevention, reduction and control of pollution, by giving
effect to applicable international regulations regarding the
discharge of oil, oily wastes and other noxious substances in the
strait;
(c) with respect to fishing vessels, the prevention of fishing,
including the stowage of fishing gear;39
(d) the loading or unloading of any commodity, currency or person
in contravention of the customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary
laws and regulations of States bordering straits.
2.
Such laws and regulations shall not discriminate in form or in fact
among foreign ships or in their application have the practical effect of
denying, hampering or impairing the right of transit passage as defined in this
section.
3.
States bordering straits shall give due publicity to all such laws and
regulations.
4.
Foreign ships exercising the right of transit passage shall comply
with such laws and regulations.
5.
The flag State of a ship or the State of registry of an aircraft entitled
to sovereign immunity which acts in a manner contrary to such laws and
regulations or other provisions of this Part shall bear international
responsibility for any loss or damage which results to States bordering straits.
Article 43
Navigational and safety aids and other improvements 
and the prevention, reduction and control of pollution
User States and States bordering a strait should by agreement c ooperate:
(a) in the establishment and maintenance in a strait of necessary
navigational and safety aids or other improvements in aid of
international navigation; and
(b) for the prevention, reduction and control of pollution from ships.
Article 44
Duties of States bordering straits
States bordering straits shall not hamper transit passage and shall give
appropriate publicity to any danger to navigation or overflight within or over
the strait of which they have knowledge.
 There shall be no suspension of
transit passage.
SECTION 3.
 INNOCENT PASSAGE
Article 45
Innocent passage
1.
The regime of innocent passage, in accordance with Part II,
section 3, shall apply in straits used for international navigation:
(a) excluded from the application of the regime of transit passage
under article 38, paragraph 1; or
(b) between a part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone
and the territorial sea of a foreign State.
2.
There shall be no suspension of innocent passage through such
straits.40
